Okay, the tape is now on, so I'll start out by asking you a little bit about
your background and what in it might have led you to write science fiction. Oh,
well now you've asked a double-barrel question there. Answer away. The second
part derives out of the first, and maybe there's no connection in background in
what led me to write science fiction. In the first place, my
big brother, Billy. Oh, I've got to diverge a little bit here. That's fine. Have
you read anything I've written? I've read everything you've written. Good God, I
don't think I've done that myself. But, all right. My big brother is involved in
various of my stories. The one which, the most recent, is the little paperback
novel, The Catalyst. And he is one of the principal characters in there,
although he is dead. And he comes back in a very spectacular way as a result of
an incredible chemical experiment. Anyhow, my big brother, Billy, that was our
family name for him. His real name was Blanford Bryan Hornet. And he was my
idol. And he got all the amazing story magazines. He got Weird Tales from the
drugstore, which I guess they don't publish anymore, but back in the middle 20s,
they did. And Weird Tales had the original stories by Lovecraft.
And I forget the name of the guy that writes Conan, but they had some of his
short stories in it, too. And anyhow, he got me interested in it. I would borrow
his copies surreptitiously and read them. Also, he had a few of the Edgar Rice
Burroughs books, the Mars books, the first couple of Tarzan books, and so on.
And these were remarkable things. I think A Princess of Mars is one of the best
adventure stories ever written. And I've read it many times trying to analyze
how Burroughs made certain of his points. It's beautifully paced, suspenseful.
It develops instant sympathy with the characters and so on. Anyhow, that was a
good one, and I read that. So I had read what there was to offer. Well, there
were other stories, too. In Argosy, some of the Edgar Rice Burroughs stories
were published as serials, like The Chestnut of Mars and other things by
Burroughs and by other people, too. And my brother Billy also had H.G. Wells'
books, The Time Machine, and I think it was called 30 Strange Stories. He had
the Charles Fort books, Low and Book of the Damned, and so on. So I picked up a
smattering of the stuff, and it was very exciting, and it was just a pleasure to
read. I will mention here right away that one of my big disappointments in life
was my trip to the Fort Worth Public Library. This was when I was 10 or 12 years
old to see if I could find some of the books of Edgar Rice Burroughs. And nobody
there had ever heard of him. So, well, I knew then that the world was divided
into two kinds of people. And I might never meet friends of Edgar Rice Burroughs
or of Tarzan or of John Carter or Deja Thoris in the Fort Worth Public Library.
But I got other things there. Anyhow, that was the background. And my brother
Billy was several years older than I. In fact, he was nine years older than I.
And he died when I was just about to graduate from high school. He had tumors of
the brain, which in those days were inoperable. Today, they don't, it wouldn't
be too much trouble to operate if they couldn't do it then. So I have remembered
him, and I have never let him go. And he has been in several of my stories. The
Ring of Ritornel. I don't know whether you've ever heard of that or not. Oh,
yes. Anyhow, he was the brother who was destroyed by the chief bad guy. But his
brain was retained. He was the poet. His name was Omere, which of course is taken
from Homer, which is Greek for blind men. Anyhow, the two brothers were united
at the end of the story. So that was sort of an idealized fantasy. Well, I had
never written anything at all. I went through, well, I was working in Washington
as a mineral economist during the war and going to law school.
And my daughter was born in 1946, and there were some bills to be paid, and we
needed the money. So I sat down and wrote my first science fiction story, which
was Time Trap. And this was bought by what was then astounding.
And I thought, well, gee, do they pay money for this stuff? So I thought perhaps
I should turn out some more of it, which I did. So I wrote for a while until my
daughter got old enough to demand more and more of my time. So the writing had
to come to an end. And it didn't really resume again until she was ready to go
off to college. This was in 1964. And I picked it up again. And I've been
writing ever since. And that's a restart, as you might say. So that's the
background of it. And I'm retired now. And I retired at the beginning of last
year, January 4, 1982, the last day at work, when I've been writing a little bit
off and on since then. And I have a few items out floating around with Scott
Meredith, who is my agent at the moment. And here I am. May I call you, Bill?
Please do. Okay. I'm Charlie. Thank you. Bill, I've been talking and talking and
talking. And you've asked only one and a half questions. So the ratio of talk to
questions is really getting out of hand. So try another question. Okay. What I
want to do now is ask you some specific questions about your works and kind of
see how they evolved. You wrote Time Trap, which was a story. And it had the
time loops and the gradual awakening of a Superman, that sort of thing. And
these elements were common in your later work. Were those themes something you
picked up unconsciously, or was this something you were striving for in your
work? Well, it must have been unconscious. This has been pointed out, or
subconscious. I don't know which is the right word. This has been pointed out to
me before.
It's perhaps a mystical striving. And I don't know where it comes from. I did,
or maybe you, yeah, you must have known. I did go to a ministerial school at TCU
at one time. This was long, long ago. And they threw me out for reasons I won't
go into here. But it was a wise decision. But I've never lost a mystic plant to
lots of things. And not all of my stories have this supernatural inclination.
Some are quite logical and down to earth.
Some do, some don't. Have you read the Venetian court? Yes, I have. Well, now
that's as down to earth as you can get. It has nothing. Well, I don't know.
Maybe it has the computer. Yeah, he's not straight dialectic materialism. Well,
who knows? I don't have a good answer to your question. No, that's fine. The
fact that it is, and just as an aside, not part of the interview, that's, I
think it's that mystical quality in your work which really appeals to me.
Because later on, when we get into the Rose, that's where I really, really can
go. But first, I want to bring up Flight Into Yesteryear, which was a novel. How
did you decide to, I mean, you had tackled a short story and now all of a sudden
you wrote a novel. Was that a pretty big decision to write a novel? Yeah, I
needed a lot of money in a hurry. We had, I had finished law school, passed the
D.C. bar, and got my first job as a patent attorney with American Cyanamid
Company in Stanford, Connecticut. And housing was short. We were renting a
little house up in Connecticut. And we were going to get evicted, it turned out.
The lady wanted to sell her house. And we were looking around. We were desperate
for a house. And it seemed to me the best way to scrape up the down payment for
a house or else help get the money to rent one that I could afford would be to
write a novel. So one thing led to another. And I sat down and in just about two
months of weekend work, wrote the, you call it Flight Into Yesteryear. I'll get
to that in a minute. That's not the right title. But anyhow, I wrote it very
quickly, typed it up, got it over to Wonder Stories, which was in combination
with Startling Stories, which was edited by Sam Mervin. And this was, let me see
what year is this, 48, yes, 1948. About October 1, 1948. And a week later, he
sent a check in the mail. Now, originally, it was 45,000 words, which is the
length they wanted for a novel in one of their magazines. And then later on, it
was expanded into a book. The original title, Bill, was nothing you've ever
heard. It was Toynbee 22. Toynbee 22. After the ship? Yes. You have heard, of
course, of the historian Toynbee, Arnold Toynbee. Yes. And his 21 civilizations,
of which the Western, I think, is either the 20th or the 21st. And what's the
next one after that? He doesn't say, but it would logically have to be the 22nd.
So we're talking here about the next civilization, or fall of civilization,
following the 21st, the Toynbee 21st civilization. So I call the little novel
Toynbee 22. Merwin went through the roof. He said, nobody will understand
Toynbee 22. Who's Toynbee? I renamed it to be Flight in the Yesterday. Of
course, that does wrap up the time travel, traveling backwards angle. When it
came out as a pocketbook later on, I believe, Wollheim of Ace changed it to
Paradox Man, with an explanation in the flyleaf of why everybody was a paradox,
because he could never do what he wanted to or so on from. Which is okay. It was
a teasing type of title, and I guess it stayed Paradox Man from then on out. So
that's how it got the title. Now, what else about it? Okay, you apparently
dashed this off in a couple of months, and yet the characters which really make
the book are deeply drawn, and they're alive, and they're smart, and they're not
really cardboard characters like so many of the science fiction characters of
that era were. Where did you get this knack for developing the characters as you
do? Oh, I lie a lot, Bill. I can see these guys, and I can project them, and I
make up stories, and here they are as acting characters, and I can see their
faces and the glints in their eyes and the curl, the sneery curl of their lips,
if they're bad guys, or the sharp intake of breath when the hero sees a disaster
looming. Actually, a lot of people, it's no big deal. But thank you for the
compliment. Nobody's ever told me that they were other than cardboard
characters. Oh, they definitely are.
Okay, now this is where I have to get reverent, because The Rose came out, and
The Rose, as far as I'm concerned, is the best science fiction book that was
ever written. First thing I've got to ask you about it is, why did it appear,
why was it first published in this obscure British magazine, Authentic? How did
it ever end up there? Well, that's easy, because nobody here would buy it. My
agent at the time, Forrest Ackerman of, I think, Los Angeles, peddled it around
here and there. Nobody in this country would buy it. It went to John Campbell, and
he wrote a nice two-line letter bag. He just couldn't use it. It wasn't the kind
of thing that any science fiction magazine or fantasy and science fiction
magazine was publishing at the time. And I should have known better for writing
it. But I wanted to write it, so I did. And finally, Ackerman sold it to this
little authentic magazine in England, and they published it. And then after
that, it began to get some circulation. Michael Moorcock picked it up for
compact books. That's Sedgwick, I think. Something like that. But anyhow, they
put out a little paperback. Then in England, it came out in a couple of
hardcover editions. And then in this country, Berkley, it may still be in front
with Berkley. I did a royalty check just last year. So it didn't come out here
first because it's time it had not arrived. You had written before for money
because you needed the money, and you wrote this one, you said, because you
wanted to write it. What was it about this book that you wanted to write? Well,
really, Jacques, again, resembles my brother a great deal.
And if you can visualize that guy with his sarcasm, his biting wit, his contempt
for all the...
Well, I don't know, but he had a high personal integrity and an impatience with
convention
and so on. At least in his head, he did. And I wanted to get him in the print.
And, of course, Anna Van Tau is me, although I tried to take on a female form to
make it effective. I would have... At one time, I would have been pleased to die
if it would bring him back. But, of course, that was just being said. But it was
a thought, and it was a psychic force driving the story.
You talked at length in this book about the enmity between science and art. Is
that something that you feel exists or has existed before? Oh, I suppose so.
It's not a big thing, Bill. But there is always a question.
What... Take a university. They have a budget. Does it go into the physics
department, your department, the chemistry department, or will they establish a
chair for teaching the Renaissance in Italy or the old masters, the painters?
Will they have a music school? Or how does... Where does it get divided up?
There is a conflict.
At the time I wrote that, I think there was a bigger conflict than there is now.
I think science was one, at least temporarily.
Thirty years ago, it wasn't at all clear. That was not too clear. The ending of
that book was very moving. It was not a tearjerker. It was very realistically
portrayed. Did you have that ending, I'm curious, in mind, when you wrote it, or
did that just develop and that's how it turned out? It just developed. That
was... I did not... That was one of the stories where I didn't know how it was
going to come out. And in fact, I worked on that one for two years, Bill. This
is not a two-month job. I read all the books on the arts in the Stanford Public
Library. This is one year. I took notes on them for my entire two weeks vacation
one year. And then it gradually began to come together. And I used, of course,
as you've seen in the story, Oscar Wilde's story of The Nightingale and the
Rose, which I'd read many years before and I was quite impressed by it. So, the
ending, though, yeah, I worked on that. At one time, it had other endings. But I
can't remember what they were. This is the best ending, I think. Oh, yeah.
Again, it had that element of this transcendental experience, which kind of led
one to suspect there might be a race of supermen that were going to be forming.
Well, that was the idea. With this power that he had, he would then be able to
do all kinds of wonderful things. And it was given to him by this act of love at
the end. The British critics, Arthur C. Clarke and Judith Merrill, Michael
Moorcock, Brian Aldiss, really liked The Rose. And yet, it seemed that it was
another decade or so before it ever caught on over here. Do you have any pet
theories on why in England it was a success, but not one over here particularly
at first? Well, I think this is due to the efforts of Michael Moorcock. He
launched it over there and then it was picked up over here. Let me give you a
little bit more history on this. There was a time when The Rose was in a longer
form and it had the name not The Rose but Invitation. It was an intergalactic
thing where the Earth was being examined to see whether it would be admitted
into a galactic brotherhood and it didn't have the ending that it now has. Damon
Knight liked that but he couldn't get his publishers to accept it. This again
was a year or so before it came out and it's inauthentic in its short form which
tells nothing. So at that point I said maybe I'm going to shorten this thing
down give it a different ending so I did. I cut it from 45,000 words down to I
think it's about 30,000 now. And it
Ackerman then was able to sell it to Authentic in England. And then it began to
pick up Arthur Clarke saw it Michael Moorcock saw it and Moorcock was getting into
the editor business over there at that time
asked to have his people compact books publish it and we have a contract for
that and they did publish it. Then it was picked up fairly quickly by two other
British outfits and hardcover for them and of course they had to pad it out with
the two other stories to make it in a book size. And Damon Knight then picked it
up from the British. He said, hey, here's the thing I've been thinking about all
these many years and that's come out in Britain. Why didn't you give it to me?
He said, okay. I sold Berkley the rights, the U.S. rights to it. And that's why
all the time lags. If it hadn't been from Moorcock it would never have gone
anywhere. There or here. It was interesting though that it was it appeared in
England and then it was 13 years later that Berkley finally put it out as the
paperback and that's the only American printing. It came out let's see, 1953 I
believe in authentic then about another 10 years in pocketbook form paperback
and another couple of years over here. Yeah. Yeah, well a prophet is not not
without honor save in his own country. I was not the first to say that. That's
the my theory on it was always that the new wave started in England and maybe
they were more attuned to the kind of writing. You got a point there. They could
live with something like this whereas over here everybody was guided pretty much
by the dean of science fiction John Campbell and he was a hardware man and
everything had to obey the laws of physics or it would be unacceptable. But I've
written many good things for him and I'm grateful that he bought my first story
so I can't complain about John Campbell. Great guy. Now the invitation has never
been published as such right? Correct. Good because I couldn't say I'd read
everything if it had. Well one or two other little items you haven't read either
but they're submerged and now we're dragging up now. Well I'll get on to them
but if you're talking about Leonard Lockhart or whatever I read them the two
anyway. Oh well that was a collaborative effort you know. I guess this would be
as good a time as any to ask about the Leonard Lockhart stories. Was it Ted
Thomas? Who was it? Yeah. Okay. Ted and I we were in the patent department at
Sinamed together. I wrote the first Leonard Lockhart story Improbable Profession
and at that time he was writing science articles for the Stanford Advocate as
well as being on the patent in the patent department at Sinamed. So I said to
him why don't you and I start this series of stories about a patent attorney and
his problems. Here's the first one. So he said yeah we can do that. So I wrote
the first one he wrote the second one. No together we wrote the second one. It
was half and half. And after that I left Sinamed and went to Grace and he
continued the series. So number three is an all subsequent stories or his even
though the name Leonard Lockhart is still used on him. Okay that'll be a good
bridge to the question after this one. But this question is in 1953 then we saw
two short stories, Child Book Chronos and the chess players. And then you
disappeared for 13 years. How did you, what happened? You wrote for this five
years pretty intensively and then zapped you're gone for a while. How did you
decide to do that? Well, as I mentioned Bill, my little girl was growing up and
at that time I was riding up in the attic of the house I was renting and later
on the one of that bought. And she would stand down in the hallway and cry. She
wanted me to come down and play with her, which I did. And I put my riding aside
and I said, well, first things first, let's bring up this little girl, raise her
right, give her some attention, and if there's time left over to write, I might
do some riding. But there was never any time left over. And I got out of the
habit altogether until she went off to college. And I thought, gee, I'm going to
need some tuition money here, so I better get back with this stuff, which I did.
So it was money again that made you start up. Yeah. Okay, when you, I'm sorry,
go ahead. I'm not sure right now whether I'm doing it for money or just to see
if I can still do it. I'm curious as to whether I've lost the touch, and maybe
this year I will find out. Anyhow, right now I'm not doing it for money,
although the money would be nice. So there are motives for you. Why do people
write? Go ahead, Bill. You had a question? Okay. In 1966, then, or approximately
then, whenever you did start up, all of a sudden we're seeing a different kind
of story, the lawyer stories. and I've got an ornament to his profession and the
alchemist, which were kind of related because they were both at the same
chemical company, and then the million-year patent and probable cause, but
they're all law stories. So I've already asked you why you started writing. That
was my first question. And why did you switch to this kind of story, which was
so different from the other stuff except for the Leonard Lockhart stories? Well,
I thought maybe I should use something, I knew something about. This is my
field, my professional field, patent work in law, and goodness knows there's
plenty of drama in it, so I thought maybe I should use some of this local
history as background. And of course that showed up profoundly in the catalyst,
and later on in the Venetian court.
So it's something I know and I thought I would try it out.
But then you wrote these stories, but then you kept it off with the Ring of
Ritternell, which was kind of a throwback to the old style. Well, that well, let
me, yeah, okay. That was kind of a throwback. That was an intermediate thing.
I can't explain the anomaly there, Bill. Well, it was a wonderful anomaly, if it
was an anomaly. If it was an anomaly, it was a good one. Well, thank you. The
interesting thing, the mystical part here to me was you had the two different
religions vying for each other, one of them essentially saying that blind chance
rules the universe, and the other one saying that it's guided by something. And
it seemed to me that you ended up by kind of siding with the latter, that there
is something guiding the cosmos. And that was a really philosophical book. And
the thing there, too, the invention, the deep, where was it Omere that stayed
there for 18 years in the deep? And I'd seen evidence of that earlier, this kind
of blind space where the protagonist goes and is disembodied and then comes
back. Does that have any special meaning to you, or is that out of your
subconscious? It isn't Omer that went into the deep. He was the brother, whose
brain was expressed. Okay, right. I'm getting it mixed up. But, okay, I'm sorry,
I interrupted you. Oh, no, we might as well get it right here. Yeah, the deep,
where did that come up? Because I'd seen evidence for that before in some of the
earlier stories from the decade earlier. I thought that would be a very
impressive concept of some all-encompassing milieu, as it were, where only the
consciousness can exist. And this is the use that I put it to. But beyond that,
Bill, I just can't really remember. The concept of a mind wandering in the deep
does go way, way back, and I had it many years before that. I just didn't have a
chance to use it. Okay, you had done a lot of homework on this novel, too, as
far as you used the steady-state cosmology theory so that the universe is
continually being made up again and being recreated. Yeah, well, of course,
that's one of the standard theories. I think that's gradually yielding now,
though. Right, but it made it interesting. It allowed you to have this rebirth,
which you tend to do, the transcendental rebirth, and it fit really nicely with
steady-state cosmology. Yeah. But on that very point, I don't know whether
you've read Firebird. Oh, yes. Now, that one starts out with a big bang and
expands and then stops and contracts. So we have an oscillation. and there are
an infinite number of big bangs because when it contracts, it goes back into the
original Fireball and it goes up and expands again. So that's another theory.
That's the apotheosis of the big bang theory. Yeah, it's the big bang with the
closed universe option where you have enough mass to make it oscillate. Yeah.
Okay, you wrote The Ring of Ritornel and then, that was 1968, then you
disappeared for another six years until The Arachnid Window came out. What
caused this interlude, if I may ask? Oh, let me think there. Gee, did I stop? I
can't recall. I must have stopped. Or at least you didn't appear in print for
six years.
I'm trying to think. Oh, my daughter graduated. She graduated in 68. And the
heat was off real long. And I had to get back on with my son. He started again
in 72.
And it continued for quite a while. but I just didn't realize there was that
gap. Maybe I was just goofing off. Well, we missed you. The Arachnid Window,
when you did get back in again, I really enjoyed that story and it has the time
loop. But I think the thing I enjoyed about that story more than anything was
the professor, who was obviously in the twilight of his career, kind of looking
back and wondering if it was all worth it and that sort of thing. I liked his
point of view. Well, I'm glad you liked it.
About that time, I realized I was someday soon going to have to retire from
grace. So I put myself in it a little bit.
But again, it was a mishmash. time It uses a number of things that were, well,
each incident probably has some counterpart in some previous science fiction
story. Time travel, of course, is one of the most patented themes possible. But
time survival, which is what happened here, might be a little different. And
some of the technology there is purely invented.
Okay, all of a sudden, you had four novels that came out. Bang, bang, bang,
bang. And Wolfhead was the first one, and it was quite different from anything,
to me, anyway, than anything you'd written before. How long had you thought
about it? How did it come up? Oh, I consider that one sort of a potboiler, Bill.
I started out writing it, I thought I would do a thing which is frowned upon.
You're not supposed to write post-atomic novels. It's, they're really
unacceptable. But here seemed to be a good one. And I hope you're not a pro
Nixon fan. No, not at all. Well, I thought, gee, here's this guy, he's about to
take over the country. Anything he does is okay just because he says so. And I'm
going to have a character like that in Wolfhead. So I put him in there. He was
the president of the underworld. And he would come out and rule the upper world.
Except he didn't. The wolf was modeled at the time on an Alaskan husky dog that
lived next door to us. And she and I were great friends. So I thought I'd put
her in it. And one thing led to another and it all seemed to come together. And
of course you've got to have telepathy and a thing like that. There were certain
novel aspects of it though like absorbing the energy of the potential earthquake
into a gigantic spinning sphere and that in turn generating the power to create
a vortex in those that have the power. So there were some novel features and
it's one of my happier efforts. It's not really serious.
well some of it is. You know at one time it had a different ending and I have to
cough when I think about it. Excuse me while I cough. This is a psychological
cough.
That was a psychological cough.
in the original ending the girl lived but I got involved in some chemical
litigation that I lost and I was so angry and so disappointed I said somebody
has to die. So I killed the heroine and wrote some poetry for her benefit so she
wouldn't feel too badly about it. And that the poetry of course is in the front
and in the back. So that's a little sidelight on that. I never would have
guessed that. You thought everything came out logically. You thought it in
advance. Our personal lives control a lot of what we do. I've got what I have. I
have about five more questions but I have to flip my tape in a minute. You
mentioned the device, the novelty in that and I meant to mention earlier the
device in the Paradox Men or the body shield with which bullets would not pierce
but low momentum projectiles would with the swords. I really have always liked
that device as a novelty in science fiction. Well, I needed something like that
to get in some sword play. Why would you want to have sword play when you can
just pull out a pistol and shoot a guy in the gut? Well, the only way you can do
it is if a pistol doesn't work. So then you've got to have something that goes
in a little floor and can secure him properly. And therefore, you will need some
kind of shield such as that. So that's the way I figured it anyhow. Okay. I'm
glad I had remembered to ask that question here. Tell you, let me change my
tape. It'll take about two minutes and I only have about five more questions if
you can hang in there. Yeah, go ahead, Bill. Okay, thank you. If you want to
take a break or something, just put the phone down and we'll holler at you. Get
a drink of water and come back and wait for your sounds good. Okay.